---
layout: post
title:  "Behind the Apple stores"
date:   2022-08-06
categories: Apple Retail
---

## Behind the Apple stores--- Ron Johnson's story of emerging as a retail sage!

Apple Inc., NASDAQ- AAPL, achieved widespread success in the retail
domain when Ron Johnson, currently a business executive based in the
USA, was in charge as the senior vice president of its retail
operations. Evidently, his ten-year stint---from 2001 to 2011---had
helped Apple's consumer-friendly retail store strategy become a unique
and successful one, serving as a role model, and turning it into the
most money-making retail chain ever. To mention, very few of its
competitors like Microsoft succeeded in brick-and-mortar stores after
following the model, although to a lesser extent. Even in 2009,
Microsoft adopted the copy-cat retail strategy when it opened new retail
stores in order to connect consumers with the best of its products.

So, what actually brought success to Ron at Apple?

To answer the question, we need to examine some substantial facts, no
less. Previously, most electronics companies were accustomed to selling
their products alongside competing brands in generic stores. From time
to time, some firms consolidated to form a 'store within a store' idea,
which provided a solely distinguished section for each brand to sell its
products. On the flip side, as well as being poorly knowledgeable and
unsophisticated about Apple's products, regular agents at its sections
in a shop had very little incentive to promote its products to customers
over those of other brands. Chiefly, these stores were treated as a
place for maximising profits as well as upselling products. For Apple,
or rather for Steve Jobs, however, things were going well but not
cutting it to a great extent.

But they had Steve Jobs as their CEO, who had a clear, avant-garde
vision about exactly what the Apple store would be. Then, to design and
develop the vision with Steve Jobs, they hired Ron Johnson, a
fifteen-year veteran in retail at Target. Before he joined Apple, it had
already been recognized through and through for its efficacious,
futuristic vibe; hence, his main task was particularly to extend that
vibe.

Firstly, he opted to control the customer's experience with a product
from its introduction to the buying journey. He wanted to hire agents
who were highly knowledgeable and sophisticated enough about Apple's
products, so that they could provide customers with the best and most
useful services. First and foremost, discouraging the idea of upselling
or cross-selling Apple's products was one of the finest reasons behind
this concept. As a result, the usual pushy salesmen were gradually
kicked out. In time, those who came in were Apple Specialists who knew
every bit of the products they were selling. At the outset, this idea
was not that successful, though. However, he continued to strive for the
perfect connotations of customer service.

Secondly, he launched the `Genius Bar` idea despite the reluctance of
Steve Jobs to be part of the idea. Obviously, people used to go to the
Apple store to buy products, but he wanted the customers to see that
there were many more things to observe like getting free technical
support for their products. It's a whole new idea at that time. At
times, they shared community events and talks, free to attend, with
experts on how to maximise your experience with your products. In
essence, he wanted to hammer the idea home that he didn't focus on
making profits but rather on retaining customers who were satisfied to
the extent that they would be encouraged to buy the upgraded products.

Finally, he revamped the store designs with a notion to reflect elegant,
stylish, and minimalistic surroundings. At that time, not only were most
customers unfamiliar with such store designs, but they had also never
experienced the customer service that Apple had started providing to
them. These two innovative aspects, in my opinion, were profound enough
to enable Ron to be a distinguished, successful retailer.

Eventually, under Jobs' marvellous tutelage and Ron's outstanding
hegemony, Apple's retail stores were capable of attaining a record level
of growth, exceeding a billion-dollar annual sales within two years, and
superseding the previous record set by The Gap clothing retailer.
Therefore, he became widely prominent as a retail sage of the century
for his unprecedented exploits. However, after leaving Apple, within
just seventeen months, he became the worst CEO ever possible. I will
tell you about this another time.

